Hello and welcome to episode 132 of AWS Bites.
In today's episode, we're diving into GitHub Action Runners on AWS.
GitHub Actions is a fantastic tool for automating CICD workflows
and its runners handles all the heavy lifting.
While GitHub offers hosted runners,
using self-hosted runners on AWS gives you more control,
lower latency and cost benefits.
We will explore today how AWS services like EC2 and CodeBuild
can be used to power your GitHub Actions runners
and how to set up self-hosted runners to optimize your workflows.
I'm Luciano and today I'm joined by Eoin for another episode of AWS Bites.
AWS Bites is sponsored by fourTheorem,
an advanced AWS partner that works collaboratively with you
and sets you up for long-term success on AWS.
Find out more at fourtheorem.com.
So Eoin, let's maybe start by explaining what are GitHub Actions runners.
Well, a lot of people will know GitHub Actions as the fairly powerful automation tool integrated into GitHub
that allows you to automate tasks like testing, building,
deploying applications directly from their repositories.
It's become, I think, the leader.
Everybody's rushing to it in some form or another,
but it allows for custom workflows triggered by events like code commits,
pushes, pull requests and releases,
making CICD processes more streamlined and manageable.
There's a lot you can do with GitHub Actions,
but GitHub Action Runners are the underlying compute instances
that execute the jobs that are defined in GitHub Actions workflows.
Now, GitHub itself provides hosted runners
and you will see them used on open source projects
and anything on GitHub out there.
But users can actually also set up self-hosted runners,
giving them more control over the environment
and the software and the hardware.
So there are people out there using GitHub-hosted runners
and using self-hosted runners.
But why would you want to go to the trouble of running runners on AWS?
Yeah, before I answer that, one thing I want to mention as well is that I really like that
when you said events, that's really broad.
You can capture all sorts of events inside GitHub.
So if you use GitHub extensively,
maybe you even create, I don't know, software releases
or even track comments on PRs.
All of these things are events
and you can run workflows as a response to that event.
And I've seen lots of very interesting use cases.
Like recently, we use Release Please,
which is a tool that helps you to automate releases.
And it kind of uses all of these different events
when you create a PR, when you merge domain,
when people comment on your PRs
to kind of help you to automate most of the release workflow.
So this is just to mention that one more reason,
I think, why people are moving to GitHub Action
if they use GitHub as a repo.
And yeah, integrates well with all parts of the software,
like lifecycle management.
So yeah, to go back to your question,
why should you use runners on AWS?
We just mentioned that running self-hosted runners
means getting more control.
And some specific reasons why we should do that on AWS
is that if you're using AWS anyway,
you can leverage IAM permissions model.
So for instance, if you are maybe deploying stuff on AWS
from your workflows,
you can have all of these credentials set up in your runners.
And therefore, when your workflows are running,
they already are out and together
rather than using other mechanisms
to propagate credentials to the GitHub-hosted runners.
Another approach is that you...
Sorry, another reason is that your runners
are co-located within the infrastructure.
So at that point, if you have everything running on AWS,
most likely you're going to have lower latency.
And yeah, you can effectively use the same regions
that you use for your workloads.
And therefore, any action that you perform there,
deploying resources, connecting to specific resources
you might have available should be much faster
than just using the self-hosted one by GitHub,
which I believe run on Azure.
So it might be a totally different network
on a totally different region.
And therefore, you might see increased latency.
And another point,
which is probably the main one for people is cost.
Because of course, when you are hosting your own runners,
you can find lots of different ways to optimize for cost.
And effectively, when you use the hosted ones by GitHub,
you get a certain amount of free capacity.
But then at some point, you need to start paying.
And so when you host your own runners on AWS,
of course, you can pick specific instances
that can be cheaper.
You can switch instances on and off depending on capacity.
And therefore, you have more opportunities
to optimize for cost.
And one final reason is that sometimes
you might have special requirements
in terms of hardware or operative system.
Maybe you need a GPU to perform certain tasks.
So if you have control on the type of machines
where you are running your workflows,
of course, you can pick the more specialized hardware
that you might need.
So the next question is,
if all of that sounds appealing,
how do you do self-hosted runners on AWS?
Well, in general, right?
If you want to add self-hosted runners,
you can do it at an organization level
or for specific repositories.
And if you have like a GitHub enterprise level setup,
you can actually also add them
at the enterprise level for all organizations.
Now, to add a self-hosted runner in your GitHub setup,
you need to run the runner application
with which GitHub will provide.
And that can run on Linux, Windows, and macOS.
And it can run on x86-64 or ARM architectures.
Now, if you have existing machines,
you can just follow the guided process
through the repository organization runners option
in your GitHub console.
And there'll be a link to the documentation
there in the show notes.
Once you have that runner application running,
GitHub will tell you how to set it up with credentials
so that it could talk to GitHub.
It basically long poles GitHub for build events,
all those different event types you talked about,
and just starts builds as required,
sending the status and log information back to GitHub,
as well as like pulling and pushing cache data to GitHub.
You don't actually have to keep all of those runners
running all the time.
So you have options there.
You can have a small pool running
or even no runners running all the time at all.
GitHub allows you to then scale up by using webhooks
to let you know when a workflow job has been queued.
In the GitHub docs, you'll see that referred to
as ephemeral runners.
Now, ephemeral runners have the advantage
of just running one job generally at a time.
So you have build isolation and increased security
since a short-lived runner has less risk
of intrusion and data leakage.
So you can run the runner application on EC2,
on premises, in containers,
or even like on a fleet of Raspberry Pis under your bed.
The limit is just your imagination.
Now, a fairly common approach is to run it on Kubernetes.
There is an Actions Runner Controller
that helps with scaling and orchestrating runners as needed.
That's quite common.
If you are a Kubernetes shop
and you have a team to run and support that infrastructure,
this is a good option to follow.
But another common approach is just simply running on EC2.
So maybe we could talk, Luciano,
what are some of the options there?
You're thinking about running on EC2,
you just have to run this application.
But as we know, running a fleet of EC2 instances
and scaling up and down, not necessarily trivial.
What are our options?
Yeah, absolutely.
I agree that it's maybe something tempting
to start to set up everything from scratch.
You set up your own VPC,
you set up EC2 instances with auto-scaling rules,
but then over time, this is something you'll need to maintain.
And there is a lot of moving parts.
So it might become something that requires
a significant amount of maintenance.
And maybe at that point,
maybe you have many advantages,
but on the other side,
you need to consider the total cost of ownership
that is going to start to build up.
So be aware of all of that.
But thankfully, there are some solutions
that try to make all of this easier.
One is called HyperEnv for GitHub Actions Runner,
and it's produced by Andreas and Michael Wittig
from the Cloudonaut podcast as well.
We mentioned them a few times in some other episodes.
So definitely worth checking it out.
This is a product that you can find in the AWS marketplace,
and it manages all the scaling in and out of instances for you,
but lets you use your own AWS account
and runs EC2 instances on demand.
And you pay per vCPU minute.
There is a little fee, I mean,
that you pay on top per virtual CPU minute usage.
Another option that we discovered quite recently
is called runs-on.com or runs-on.
And it's quite similar to HyperEnv,
but it basically lets you run everything yourself.
You are using it commercially,
but basically you buy it
and then configure a license for a reasonable small fee.
And effectively, this can be a nice option
for non-commercial projects,
especially if you are looking for something
that allows you to drastically save cost.
One of these options may be something
that can help you to basically get the best of both worlds.
You are running and managing your own EC2 instances,
but with a limited amount of management effort on your side.
And at the same time,
it should help you to save cost
compared to the hosted option directly by GitHub.
The other question is like,
are you willing to pay another vendor?
Of course, this is something you need to commercially decide
if it's worth doing for you.
But yeah, on the other side,
you are buying more control and flexibility.
And there is another option,
of course, we mentioned already in the intro
that is using CodeBuild.
So what about CodeBuild?
Is it a good option, a bad option?
Is it easy or difficult to set up?
Well, that's a good question.
I mean, it's one that really intrigued me
when they announced that you could do this last year.
First, CodeBuild, for anyone who isn't really familiar with it,
because I think a lot of people have given CodeBuild
a bit of a pass,
it's AWS's continuous integration service.
And it lets you run, build, and test workloads
on lots of different compute types.
It's been around a good while and is fairly mature.
It doesn't have the workflow and orchestration support
that you get with things like GitHub Actions,
GitLab CI, or say CircleCI.
But I think it's quite underappreciated, actually, CodeBuild,
because it's quite simple in what it can do,
but it's really powerful.
It doesn't let you orchestrate workflows
like those other tools do, as I mentioned,
but AWS has a separate service for that,
which isn't as good, I would say,
which is CodePipeline.
Now, you can check out episode 44 on that
when we did kind of a CodePipeline
versus GitHub Actions episode.
But CodeBuild itself is quite powerful, right?
It supports Linux, Windows.
You can do Android builds.
You can do macOS builds.
And you can run really large instances
like with 72 vCPUs and 145 gigs of RAM.
You can do ARM and x86 on it.
And recently, it has added the ability
to run on AWS Lambda under the hood,
which can make scale up much faster
if your build is suitable for Lambda.
And it even has GPU support.
So it's useful for training and inference
in your builds as well.
So it doesn't have to be a choice of CodeBuild
or GitHub Actions these days.
Because CodeBuild now has support for GitHub Actions,
that means you can actually use CodeBuild
as your runners and get all the orchestration
and all the integration
and all of the action support
from the whole GitHub Actions ecosystem.
But surprisingly, it's not very complex.
In fact, it's a very small amount of work
to set this up.
And I think people should really try it
if they're looking at one of these options
and thinking, how can I improve cost,
get better integration with AWS
in my GitHub Actions?
I'd definitely say, give this a try.
And we have some help,
lots of resources for you to check out.
There are plenty of subtle things
that can go wrong in the setup.
So we will share a code example
that will help here,
as well as some repositories
that other people have created
that will help you to get it right first time,
not like us.
So the first thing you need to do
is to configure authorization for CodeBuild
to connect to your GitHub account,
like be it a repo, an organization,
or your whole enterprise.
Now there's three ways of doing that.
You can use OAuth in the console,
you can use a personal access token,
or you can use CodeConnections.
I prefer the CodeConnections approach,
keeping personal access tokens up to date
and securing them and sharing them
is something I'd rather avoid.
So CodeConnections is a method
that uses GitHub apps,
and AWS basically automates the process
of installing a GitHub app
into your GitHub account
that has the right permissions for the repos.
And you can create this
with infrastructure as code.
So in our code example,
that will link in the show notes,
it'll create your CodeConnection.
This used to be known as CodeStar Connections.
So you will see in the documentation
both terms being used.
And that basically creates
this connection resource in a pending state.
You then need to go into the console
and activate it and link it
into your GitHub account
with an OAuth flow.
And you just need to do this once.
If you've already done it,
you can just reuse an existing one.
So once you have that CodeConnection set up,
then you can actually create
a code build project.
And the code build project creation
is pretty simple.
There are a few gotchas
with the documentation.
So again, look at our code examples.
Hopefully it'll make it easier for you.
You just need to set up your source.
Normally with code build projects,
you're linking it to a repo,
but you can also make it a generic one
that isn't linked to a specific repo,
but instead is linked to your organization.
And then you just set your authorizer
to the CodeConnection ARN
you've just created.
You need to enable webhook triggers
so that it can create GitHub webhooks
and link AWS and GitHub together.
And then you'll need your IAM role as normal.
And that'll need permissions
to access CodeConnection,
CloudWatch logs,
and whatever else you might need
for your scenario.
So this is one of the advantages
is that rather than having to do
an OIDC integration
or some vault shenanigans,
you can just use IAM
for your permissions
in your code build job.
And you can still do
all those other methods as well,
of course.
In your build project,
you can also set the default compute type,
like the operating system,
container image,
the CPU architecture,
and whether you're using
standard Linux or AWS Lambda.
The nice thing here, however,
is that you can actually
override those values
in your GitHub workflow YAML files as well.
And you can switch the instance size
and the operating system as needed.
And you can even do matrix builds
with all the different CPU architectures
and operating systems too.
And then you can set a build concurrency
within your project.
It is worth mentioning
that the default code build
concurrency limits are quite low,
like sometimes one.
So that's a soft limit.
You just need to go into the service quote
as part of the AWS console
and request one.
They're just trying to save you
from running up a big build.
Now, the code build project name
you give is important
as this is what links it
to your GitHub workflow YAML.
So in your workflow,
you just set your runs on.
If you've used self-hosted runners,
you'll be used to setting runs
on something like self-hosted.
That's a property
in your workflow YAML.
And you just need to use
a special syntax,
which is like code build
dash project name dash
a couple of variables
that come from your GitHub run.
And then you just use
your GitHub actions as normal, right?
You'll commit this workflow.
It should start running
directly on code build.
Your actions should look like
any other GitHub actions running
and your pull requests
and deployments
are all running in GitHub actions.
But the actual build
is running on code build.
And your GitHub action caches,
as we mentioned,
are still there.
Might be worthwhile
talking about why you'd use
code build for GitHub actions.
I'd say like we talked about
some of the reasons
for running on AWS,
but for code build specifically,
I was generally
pretty impressed by it.
It's quite simple to set up
and gives you a lot of flexibility.
Setting up all the stuff
on EC2,
managing a third party vendor,
another one
might be a bit of friction
for you and your organization
to do that.
So code build is definitely
worth checking out.
So if you have like a VPC
in AWS
and you want your build environment
to access this network
and keep everything
within that AWS network boundary,
code build is a good way
to do that.
If you want to use
IAM roles for permissions
and don't want to use
the OIDC credentials flow
or something else,
that's a good reason
to use code build.
Or maybe you've already
got GitHub runners
and you're just struggling
to cope with capacity.
So you'd want some extra
on-demand paper use capacity
and you can just add
some code build
into the mix as well.
Or you might actually have
reserved code build capacity
because you can use,
you can create
code build reserved capacity
fleets that are cheaper
and always available for you
and you could utilize
those in your actions as well.
Should we describe
our experience in general?
We have our code repository.
What do you think, Luciano?
How would you assess it?
Yeah, I think we spent some time experimenting
with this
and getting to understand
the limitations.
We, as you said,
we have a link
to our repo
in the show notes.
So definitely worth
checking that out
to see exactly
what did we try.
And this repo
contains a CDK stack
that sets up
everything for you,
which means
it's going to create
the CodeConnection,
two different code build projects.
One is using
a small size code build runner
and another one
is using Lambda runners
with four gigabytes of RAM.
So you can see effectively
that the difference
between the two
when you run
this particular stack
or maybe you can use it
as a reference
and just pick one
or the other
and copy paste
that particular piece
of configuration
into your own
specific project.
To be fair,
getting the configuration
right was a little bit
challenging.
The documentation
isn't too bad,
but it doesn't cover
all the configuration options,
particularly if you want
to set it up
for an organization
and not just
for a single repository.
I think there are
some blind spots there
and we were left
to figure it out
exactly how to do it.
Not the end of the world.
I think eventually
we figure it out,
but just something
that can be maybe
improved on.
So if someone from AWS
is listening,
please make that
a little bit better
for future users.
So the examples
also don't provide
a good CloudFormation,
CDK or Terraform example.
So it's,
as always,
a little bit more
you go in the web UI
and click stuff around,
which I mean,
it's a good way
of starting,
but in general,
we all know
that it's better
to do things
in infrastructure as code.
So it would be nice
to start to see
more examples
in that direction
coming directly
from the official documentation.
Of course,
the community
is always great.
There are other people
that have tried
things like this already
and they have shared
their own solutions
and you can find
examples using Terraform
or even CDK-TF.
So it was easy
to just look at those
and try to figure out
exactly what we were doing wrong
and what we should change
in our setup.
We will have some links
for other repos
as well in the show notes.
In terms of performance,
the performance
that we saw
was actually pretty good,
but not as fast
as you will get
with runners
that are always running
directly on GitHub.
That's especially
the latency
to start
a new workflow.
In general,
we saw about
30 seconds
of overhead
just to start
a new run
of a specific workflow.
And we tested
with a very simple workflow
that just did
60 seconds of sleep
and the minimum
end-to-end time
that we observed
was 90 seconds.
So this is how
we noticed
that there was
some delay
just outside
our business logic
for the workflow itself.
Of course,
in that delay,
we need to assume
that there is
lots of stuff going on,
for instance,
provisioning the ephemeral runner,
which of course
is going to add
that overhead,
but I don't know,
30 seconds feels
maybe a little bit too much.
Hopefully,
something that
you can somehow
fine-tune
and reduce that latency
because sometimes
if you have
very short-lived
workflows,
it might be nice
to see them
starting straight away
and get a result
straight away.
Very commonly,
one thing that I do a lot,
especially for
open source projects
is to have,
I don't know,
a workflow that just
does linting
and some other
very small checks
for code quality
and those tests
can run in like
seconds.
So it would be nice
to just see
a green tick
for every commit
in a matter
of a few seconds.
So hopefully
something worth
looking at
and maybe
something that
can be improved.
In our case,
we tested 100
concurrent jobs
on each runner.
Most of them
took around 90 seconds,
but we had
high degrees
of concurrency,
so 60 of them
more or less
were running
simultaneously
and some of them
took over 3 minutes.
Now,
probably it's because
they were left
in a queue
for a while,
but yeah,
I don't know
if you have
more details on that,
or if we should
just talk about
pricing.
Very difficult to know,
I think,
where all that time
is going.
If you look at,
because you can look
at the code build
job execution timings
as well,
and in general
it shows like
three seconds
to provision a runner.
I think there's also
some just communication
delay between
code build
and GitHub
and I don't know
who's responsible
or if it's just like
there's a queue
and the queue
has to drain
or what,
some of it
you don't see,
but basically
the times we're reporting
that 90 seconds
is everything
in your GitHub
actions workflow
and code build
will often be finished
but it still seems
to take some time
for GitHub to say,
okay,
your job workflow
is finished.
So your job
might actually be done,
it's just not reporting
it as done.
I don't have all the details.
Now,
we should talk about pricing.
It's interesting to compare.
Now,
it's also quite difficult
because you're not always
comparing apples with apples
but if you exclude
the AWS free tier
which has like
a good code build junk
and the free minutes
you get with your
GitHub subscription,
we can just do
a fairly simple
pricing comparison.
If we take a fairly
modest 2vCPU instance
and try to pick something
that's relatively similar
across the different options,
maybe looking at the cheapest
which is just
on-demand EC2.
Now,
you could also do
spot EC2,
of course.
That's probably
your best cheapest option
is to use spot
and I think
the runs-on tool
we mentioned
allows you to do spot
as far as I remember.
If we take
an EC2 medium
and then compare it
with a code build
small,
the price for code build
is about seven times EC2.
Now,
but if you compare that
to GitHub Actions
on a standard 2-core,
GitHub Actions
is about 11 times
the cost of EC2.
Now,
if you go to
reserved code build instances,
it's only about 4x the price
and lambda is not too bad
actually.
It's even slightly cheaper
than code build standard.
It's about 6.4 times
the price
for a 4 gigabyte lambda
which is roughly similar.
So you can choose
different size lambdas.
Now,
of course,
you're not really comparing
the same thing
because with EC2
you're going to have
more of a rectangular
utilization graph
which often has
a lot of waste in it,
right?
So you might end up
running your EC2
for five minutes
in order to run
a two-minute job.
So there's always going
to be a bit of extra waste
when you use EC2
compared to using something
that's very on-demand
and per second
like code build
or lambda
or GitHub Actions.
And of course,
you have the extra overhead
with EC2
just in terms of setup
and maintenance.
It doesn't really make sense
to always just compare
on a cost basis like this
because when you have
very bursty demands
for your builds
and sometimes you've got
nothing running,
most of the time
you've got nothing running
but then you've got
a hive of activity
when people need
lots of concurrency
and maybe you don't want
to wait for lots of EC2s
to spin up and react.
You want things that are
really very suitable
for the specific workflows
you need,
lots of different compute types,
some on Lambda,
some on Linux,
some on Windows,
whatever.
So it might just make more sense
to use something like code build
or something else.
Of course,
I'm talking about pricing there.
If you're using ARM,
it's half the price on code build.
With EC2,
it depends on the instance type
but if you can get away with ARM,
definitely go for that.
You get 50% saving
out of the box.
Now, we talked about
running on Lambda
and it's quite interesting
when you actually see
your GitHub Actions
running on Lambda.
It's almost surprising
to see it just succeed
when it's like cloning your repo,
doing NPM install.
Even though these are
just node processes,
of course they should run on Lambda
but in the testing we did,
we didn't come across
any major limitations.
Everything we did,
in fact,
we just took an existing
open source project we had,
the SLIC Watch project
we've talked about before.
It's got quite a few build steps in it,
doing code coverage,
tests,
unit tests,
running lots of different NPM builds,
TypeScript transpilation
and everything.
It just worked.
There are some limitations
with Lambda.
You can use custom images
but you can't do things
like root,
use root.
So you can't use
package manners
like yum and RPM.
You can't do Docker in Docker
because you don't have
privileged mode
and it's not a proper
Docker runtime.
You don't have any
file system access
outside slash TMP.
You don't have the GPU option.
You don't have caching
and you don't have a VPC.
So if you want to use a VPC,
you have to use
a standard runtime
in CodeBuild.
But still,
I would say,
like you just mentioned,
linting Luciano.
That's a perfect example
of a workflow
that can run very easily
in Lambda.
And the chances
of you having to wait
for CodeBuild
to provision a container
is much less
if you're just using Lambda.
So it should be
up and running
in a few seconds
and you should have
your results
a few seconds later.
Actually,
I was using the Biome
JavaScript TypeScript linter
in one of these tests
and the whole thing
just ran in a couple of seconds.
Yeah, Biome is amazing,
especially for large projects.
It can do
all the linting
and formatting
in literally seconds
or less.
Anyway,
I think we have covered
everything we wanted
to cover for today.
Hopefully,
we gave you
a good overview
of what is
GitHub Action Runners,
why should you
consider running
your own hosted runners
on AWS.
And yeah,
hopefully,
we gave you an idea
of the different options,
pricing comparisons.
So let us know
if you found
all of that interesting
or if you have
other questions
about things
maybe we didn't cover
or if you tried yourself,
maybe you know
other tools,
maybe you have
your other resources
that you came across
and use them
to set things up.
Please definitely
share them with us
because, of course,
we are happy
to compare other options
and, of course,
make all of these resources
available to other people.
Speaking of which,
again,
all the things
we mentioned today,
we will have links
in the show notes.
We will also have
a few additional links
about other resources
that we used
during our experiments.
So hopefully,
all of that together
will give you
a very good starting point
for whichever option
you are going to choose
if you end up playing
with the idea
of running your own
GitHub Runners
on EC2
or Lambda
or maybe using CodeBuild.
So thank you very much
and we'll see you
in the next episode.